Winterfrüh
Ilse Aichinger

Eh die Träume rosten und brechen,
laß die Geliebten drauf hinunterfahren,
die Großen und die Kleinen in den grauen Mänteln,
schaut her, die helle Bahn, das Eis.


Winter-early

'Ere the dreams rust and crack,
let the lovers
[
    "upon them descend,",
    "descend upon them,"
]
the great and small in the grey coats,
[
    "look outward,",
    "look over,",
    "see there,"
]
the 
[
    "bright tram,",
    "bright train,"
] 
the ice. 


General Commentary:

Utilizing the classic German capacity for compounding words, the title
of this poem alone evokes a particular state of being, a particular kind
of time. Not just "upon a winter's morn," but rather the specific kind of
earliness that only occurs when the cold has come in through the window
and you crystalize out of sleep into a warm bed and a frigid
world. There is a kind of paradox here, which becomes almost
contrapuntal in these four lines: rust and lovers, grey coats against the
sparkling ice. It may be bleak, but it is also bright,
and the poem tries to carry the brightness over.

The poem rides on imagery and locality, dipping into the shared experience
or imagining of the reader. It was important to convey as much of this as
possible in translation. Although the language is fairly straightforward,
the ability to overdetermine particular elements of the translation by
making them dynamic was very useful.

Descending on a Dream:

The directionality of this particular phrase seemed very important.
The German verb "hinunterfahren" can mean either "to descend" or 
"to drive down [somewhere]," and while the root verb "fahren" – "to drive"
seems a very active word, in the context of the phrase, it seems like
it could also suggest a more passive tone. The grammatical structure 
of the German phrase, paired with the semantically passive reading of the 
verb, causes a certain amount of ambiguity as to whether the lovers 
are the dreamers or the dreamed, or both. This is why the English 
translation gives two variants: to encapsulate multiple readings.

Looking Collectively:

Unlike German, English does not distinguish between the singular and 
plural imperative. There is no easy way to tell whether a
command ("look over there!") is directed at one person or multiple
people outside of the context of the situation. This is especially
problematic for this poem because the singular imperative is used
two lines before – "laß" – "let [directed at one person]." It is
clear in the German that the fourth line begins by addressing
a group of people, so an attempt was made to convey the same idea
in English by essentially repeating the command.

Was bedeutet "Bahn"?

What does "train/streetcar/railway" mean? This is one of the more
difficult incongruities between languages: how much work does a
word do, and how does it work?